The Project Gutenberg eBook of The book of Artemas, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The book of Artemas

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: October 12, 2022 [eBook #69143]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF ARTEMAS ***







[Illustration: Cover art]



  THE BOOK OF ARTEMAS

  _Concerning men, and the things
  that men did do, at the time when
  there was war_



  NEW YORK
  GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




  COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY
  W. WESTALL & CO.

  COPYRIGHT, 1918, BY
  GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY


  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




  UNTO
  EVE




THE BOOK OF ARTEMAS



CHAPTER I.

1 _The Chronicles of Artemas, the scribe_.  3 _The state of the land
of Eur_.  4 _Concerning Willi, who ruled over the men of Hu_.  7
_Concerning Mud, that was his son_.  9 _Mud encourageth the ambitions
of his father_.  19 _And sendeth in unto him a certain wise man_.  21
_The parable of the oak tree_.  26 _And the interpretation thereof_.
29 _Willi maketh him a war_.


The words of Artemas of the scribes that _were_ in Lon in the land of
En.

2 Of the things that were and of the things that were to be:
concerning men and the things that men did do.

3 ¶ Now there was peace over all the land of Eur and amongst all the
nations that abode there, it was a time of great content.

4 ¶ But Willi, who ruled over the men of Hu, was a crafty man and
greedy, and _his ways_ were devious.

5 And when he beheld the prosperity of the land and the industry of
those that dwelt round about, and _that_ they did live in peace, the
one with the other, his heart grew black within him and his soul
vomited envy.

6 _Moreover_, he was a proud man and ambitious withal.  His
covetousness was like unto a tree, that being planted in fertile
ground, flourisheth mightily; and the independence of the peoples
_was_ as gall unto his vanity.

7 ¶ Now the son of Willi was a young man, and he was puffed out with
pride and his mind was empty; in his living, he was vicious, and his
name, _it was_ Mud.

8 And when Mud saw that his father's soul was torn with the violence
_of_ his envy and that he coveted that _which_ was not his, it
rejoiced him exceedingly.

9 ¶ And he laid _himself_ out to entice his father, and did speak
many specious words unto him, and was for ever _at him_.

10 And Mud said unto his father, All Highest, hail!  And Willi
answered him, saying, Thou _art_ my son: And Mud said unto him, Great
art thou above all the kings of the earth, for thou hast served the
Lord faithfully throughout the days of thy life.

11 And Willi answered him, _saying_, Verily have I found favour in
the sight of the Lord; and in my sight has the Lord _also_ found
favour.

12 And Mud looked upon his father _from the side_; he gazed upon his
countenance with a furtive look, and _did see_ that his father's
vanity was without bounds.  So he spake unto him again, saying,

13 Thy shadow is as the sun whose rays bring forth warmth, _giving_
life unto all them that are beneath it.

14 And Willi said, That _which_ thou sayest is indeed true; yet doth
the sun shine over all the world whilst my shadow is for ever at two
hours _after_ summer noon.

15 And Mud answered him, saying, In the evening of thy days _shall_
thy shadow grow long, and it shall spread its shade over all the
world; for _it is_ a good world and deserveth well of thee.  And the
Lord will surely reward thee for all thy righteousness.

16 And Willi said, Verily, art thou my son, and in wisdom art thou
second only to thy father.  I will make me a covenant with the Lord,
and it shall come to pass that I _shall have_ dominion over all the
earth and over all the waters that are on the earth.  And whatsoever
shall be _left over_, that will I give unto the Lord for _to be_ His
own.

17 And I will _make_ might right, and them that bow not down before
me, those will I surely slay, both they and their wives and their
children and the stranger that is within their gates.  And their oxen
will I take _as an offering_ unto my Majesty.  And their household
goods shall be mine by the strength of my sword.

18 And he said unto Mud, _that was_ his son, Send thou unto me a wise
man that I _may_ take counsel of him.

19 ¶ And a certain man whose name was Bern was sojourning in the
land, and him did Mud bring unto his father, _having_ first
instructed him privily.

20 And when he that _was_ called Bern came into the presence of the
king, he bowed him low, saying, Hail, O king!

21 ¶ And he began to speak, saying, There was a certain husbandman
and he planted him an oak in a place _where_ trees grew;

22 And it came to pass that the oak grew up and its roots spread
themselves about.  And _there was_ not room enough in that place, and
the trees that were planted there _before_ rose up and choked it so
that it did languish away until there was no sap remaining _in it_.

23 And when the husbandman saw _how_ it was, he sent his servant with
an axe and he told him to cut down _the trees_ that were round about.

24 Yea, every tree except the oak did he command him to cut down, so
that there _was_ room, and the oak did flourish as the cedars _that
are_ in Lebanon, and its branches did sway them over all the world.

25 And Willi said unto him, Explain unto me the meaning of this
parable, thou very wise man.  _Of what_ is the oak and _of what_ the
trees that were round about?

26 ¶ And Bern answered him, _saying_, The nurseryman is the Lord of
Hosts.  The oak that He planted, it is thyself, O king; and the trees
that would choke it, they are the nations that dwell round _about_.

27 The axe is thine army, and the servant of the husbandman is he
whom thou _shalt make_ to be the captain over all thine host.

28 And when Willi heard _the things_ that the wise man did say, he
was well pleased; wherefore he gave unto him a cross, and _it was_
made of iron.

29 ¶ And _after_ he had made him secret preparations, he went out
with a great multitude of men and much munition, and he made him a
war, _the_ like whereof was never known on earth before.




CHAPTER II.

1 _Peace reigneth in En_.  2 _Internal discord is loosed_.  4 _The
men of Ire have much power_.  6 _They obtain their demands_.  12
_Petty strife prevaileth_.  14 _The priests see wickedness
everywhere_.  19 _The owners of ships raise their hire_.  26 _The
rulers are blamed_.  27 _Concerning the war scribes_.


Now there was peace throughout all the land of En, and the noise of
battle _was_ afar off.  And the merchants of the world did bring
their wares for to sell them, even fine cloth and spices _that were_
rare did they bring in their ships.

2 ¶ But he that putteth away the sword doth loosen the tongue;
wherefore it came to pass that _there was_ great talk amongst the
rulers, and the mighty men _did say_ things, the one against the
other.

3 And there were many jealousies amongst them, and they _did_ utter
spiteful sayings _concerning_ each other; verily, they were like unto
evil-minded children in a quarrel, and _their_ pettiness of spirit
was an abomination.

4 ¶ Now an House that is divided against itself _will stand_
anything.  And when men from the land of Ire took power into their
own hands and did rule over En, _there was_ no one amongst the rulers
to say them nay.

5 And the men of Ire exacted tribute from the rulers, and the people
of the land rebelled not; for penury _doth_ bring forth wisdom, but
prosperity breedeth only fools.  And the prosperity of the land of En
_was_ great.

6 ¶ And when the men of Ire saw that _all that_ which they demanded
was given unto them, they _did_ make them long faces, and _did_
grumble aloud, and _did_ utter groans in the public places _and_
strange noises in the portals of the House.  And when they had thus
prepared the way _for it_, they did straightways ask for more.

7 And a few that dwelt in the land of En _did make_ them a stand,
saying, What we have given unto you, _it is_ enough.  Therefore, get
ye hence, ye men of Ire.

8 And the men of Ire waxed very wroth, and they did curse the men of
En and did swear strange oaths _concerning them_, so that they that
were weak amongst the rulers began to shiver in their sandals.

9 And they held them a council together _in_ secret and did agitate
themselves greatly, seeking _for a means_ whereby they might escape
from the wrath of the men of Ire, for it was a terrible wrath,
_being_ very ugly.

10 And after one had said one thing and another had said another
thing, then _did_ all them that were gathered together make them an
agreement, and they did give unto the men of Ire _all those things_
that they had demanded.

11 And the men of Ire prepared them long faces and did get them ready
_for_ another occasion.  Neither was the day ever known when any man
_that was_ from Ire did render thanks for that _which_ he had
received.

12 ¶ And class quarrelled with class, the artisan _with_ the master,
the noble _with_ the serf, the priests _with_ the people, and the
fools _with_ one another.

13 And all those that thought one thing did contend with them that
did think another thing, and the bickering _that was_ between them,
it was very great.

14 ¶ And there were those amongst the priests that _did_ travel about
the country, crying out in a loud voice, and saying, Wickedness!
Wickedness!  All _is_ wickedness!

15 And they did say many things _concerning_ the young men and
_concerning_ the damsels, and also _concerning_ them both together.
And those that listened unto them were amazed that such things should
be; and some _there were_ that doubted.

16 And the priests did raise their hands _unto_ heaven, saying,
Deliver us from evil.  And the people did drop their hands _towards_
the earth, saying, Deliver us from the priests.

17 And notwithstanding all that _which_ was said by the priests and
by them that did _grub_ into things, the wickedness of the people was
in no wise greater than the wickedness _of the_ other nations of the
world.

18 And this was the state of the land of En when Willi did make him
the War: but _afterwards_, it was different.  For the rulers declared
them a truce, and no longer cried out _after_ one another in the
public places; nevertheless, the ardour _of the_ priests remained
without abatement, and there were those amongst the newsmongers _on
both sides_ that did conceal their partisanship in an ill manner.

19 ¶ And because the land of En was built upon an island, therefore
was it necessary for the food of the people _to be_ brought unto them
in ships.

20 And the men of Hu did sink of these ships a few, and the rulers of
the land _did_ seize a great number of _them_ for to carry the armies
and the implements of war.  Wherefore the number _of them_ that were
available for to bring the people's food, it _was_ less than before.

21 And they that did own the ships that remained did make them new
rates of freight _that were_ twofold, _and_ threefold, _and_ fourfold
greater than those that had been before.

22 And the merchants did make them higher prices for the wares that
they did sell; and some did do so because _it was_ forced upon them;
and others did do so because they were greedy for the profits,
wherefore they spake privily, the one unto the other, saying, See,
brother, the opportunity is _upon_ us.

23 And because it was _beyond_ them and they could devise no plan
against it, therefore did the rulers of the land hold themselves
aloof from all _these things_ for a full two years.

24 Wherefore the people did pay them very dearly for everything that
they did eat, and those that did sell merchandise in the market
places, these grew fat in a lean time.

25 And when the people murmured, the rulers spake soft words unto
them, saying, Assuredly is your lot cast in _an hard_ place; even so,
the straits of the men of Hu, are they not worse than yours?  And
because it _was_ war, therefore _were_ the people easily appeased.

26 ¶ Nevertheless, there were many that complained because the owners
of the ships and those that sold the people's food did make them
profits such as never before; and many blamed the rulers that did
countenance such things at a time when _there was_ war.

27 ¶ Now there were _certain men_ amongst the scribes and they did
wage them the war _on_ paper.

28 And, _of these_, Belloc did write him for the great captains and
for them in authority, that _they might_ read and learn and receive
his commandments.

29 And Blatch did write him for the common soldier, wherefore the
violence of his words was _a thing_ for delight, demolishing all
contrary argument.

30 And Garv did write him _so that_ all might read.  And because
_there was_ nothing that this man did leave unwritten, therefore did
_those_ that followed him perforce forego their sabbath meal.

31 And there was also Horatio, being he that _did_ for ever step into
the breach; yea, even into the breach _that was not_ there did he
step; and he wrote _concerning_ righteousness and blood.

32 And there were also others in great number, and all _did_ write
them freely and as men that _did_ know.

33 And when the captains did not do those _things_ that had been
written down for _their_ instruction, then was there much anger
amongst the war scribes, and they did gnash their teeth _in rage_.

34 Wherefore they were continually provoked beyond endurance, and
they wrote them _more_ because of _it_.




CHAPTER III.

1 _The rulers in En_.  3 _Concerning Herbert_.  8 _Concerning David_.
11 _Concerning Winston_.  13 _Concerning Walter_.  14 _Concerning
Reginald_.  19 _Concerning Samuel_.  20 _Concerning Simon_.  25
_Concerning Masterman_.  26 _Concerning Augustine_.  29 _Concerning
Grey_.  33 _Concerning John_.  34 _Concerning Haldane_.  41
_Concerning Tennant_.  42 _Concerning the other rulers_.


Now these were the rulers in the land of En in the days when George
that _was_ the Fifth did reign _and_ the Great War _was begun_.

2 There was Herbert, and David, and Winston, and Walter, and
Reginald, and Samuel, and Simon, and Masterman, and Augustine, and
Grey, and John, and Haldane, and Tennant; and _there were_ also
others, whereof the number was great beyond computation.

3 ¶ And Herbert was the man that was responsible unto the people, and
he did take the head place at the table whereat the rulers did sit.
And there was in him an abundance of patience such as no man did ever
have _before_; and he did keep the rulers together, all in one body.

4 And in time of discord he was like unto a gentle shepherd _when_
the rams do fight, and them that spake angrily in the council chamber
he did soften with honeyed words.

5 Nevertheless, there were some that _did say_ wicked things
concerning him, and they did compare him unto a woman _that is
advanced_ in years.

6 And Herbert had taken unto himself a wife.

7 And when _the time_ came, he did leave the head place at the table
whereat the rulers did sit, and he did go.

8 ¶ Now before that it _was_ war, David was an hated man; yet was he
also loved.  And _afterwards_ it came to pass that he was a much
loved man, yet was he also hated.

9 And David did _many_ things so that men spake about him, saying,
Behold, he is like unto a skeleton key that fitteth all locks.  And
_whatsoever_ there is need of, that thing will he surely do.

10 But _because_ he was new made and _did_ carry on, therefore he
lost favour with certain of the Pharisees, and his name did _become_
an abomination unto them.  Yet, when _the time_ came, he went up unto
the head place at the table whereat the rulers did sit.

11 ¶ Now Winston _was_ a wild youth and rash, hot of the tongue and
venturous in his undertakings.  Nevertheless, _he was_ not lacking in
understanding.

12 And because he was like unto new wine when the vintage is good,
therefore did they set him down in a place that was cool, _saying_,
Peradventure, in a little time, there will be maturity.

13 ¶ And Walter was over all them that did deal in merchandise, and
he sojourned amongst the rulers _during_ many months.  And the things
that he did do, what man knoweth thereof?  And when _the time_ came,
he did go.

14 ¶ Now Reginald was blessed with an heart that was overflowing
_with_ the milk of human kindness, and the lot of the immigrants from
the land of Hu did move him mightily, so that he _did weep_ tears.

15 And there were many of these men in the land of En, some _of them_
being there that they might make money, and some _of them_ were come
for to spy out the land.

16 But Reginald _did_ scorn to make him a distinction between them,
fearing lest some man should say, See, there is _one_ that he
favoureth.

17 Neither would he lay himself out to hinder any man that was
earning his bread; and the spies _that were_ in the land, it was
their means of livelihood.

18 Therefore did he uphold them, each man in his place, _because_ he
_was_ Reginald.  Wherefore there were many that conceived him weak
_unto_ foolishness.  And when _the time_ came, he did go.

19 ¶ And unto Samuel was given power over all the cities of En.  And
this man's name was not for ever in the mouths of the people, neither
did they concern themselves at all _with the things_ that he did do.
Nevertheless, _he was_ not an idle man.  But when _the time_ came, he
did go.

20 ¶ Now Simon was a man that was strange in his beliefs, neither
_was_ he an help in time of trouble.  And there were some that,
seeking the reason for his _falling away_ in the time of his
country's tribulation, did say he was _possessed_ of a devil.

21 And he was a man peaceable beyond all reason, _so that_ he did put
himself against the patriots of the land of En when they did set them
out for to wage war in a cause that _was_ just.

22 And because he and those that were with him _were_ as a voice that
crieth in the wilderness, therefore he did get him out from the inner
chamber wherein did sit the rulers of the land, and he _did_ make one
cause with them _that did_ for ever carp and cavil.

23 And when the counsellors assembled together for to make them
ordinances _for the_ salvation of the country, then would Simon rise
upon his feet and he would make him an objection; therefore was he an
hindrance unto them that did strive _against_ the perils that beset
the land.

24 And Simon was not loved in the country of En.  Yet was he earnest
in the things that he did do, being a man with a conviction _that is_
founded amiss.

25 ¶ And he that was chief amongst all the rulers did say, on an
occasion, Find thou me _the_ man; then will I find _the_ office.  So
they found him Masterman.  And when _the time_ came, he did go.

26 ¶ Now Augustine _was_ a great sage, and there was no man in all
the land of En that did surpass him in the knowledge _that is_ gotten
of books.  _Therefore_ they did make him to rule over the land of Ire.

27 And on a time when he was deep in engagement with the words of the
ancient Greeks, behold, the men of Ire stole up secretly and they
fell upon his servants _so that_ many of them did die.

28 And when it was told unto Augustine what the men of Ire _had_ done
unto his servants, he _was_ filled with a great wonder and his breast
_was_ torn with sorrow.  And because it was _a thing_ that liked him
not, therefore did he remove _himself_ from amongst the seats of the
rulers, neither returned he thither again.

29 ¶ Now the chief of the scribes that did write unto the rulers of
the nations _concerning_ matters, his name was Grey, And he did
_send_ him epistles unto the four corners of the earth, _saying_ this
and _saying_ that.

30 And to him there were given many tasks that were difficult, and he
did not always find favour with the people; for there are some that
look _from afar_ towards the end, but the stones _that are_ upon the
way, them do they count not at all.

31 And it was said concerning him that he was a man of strength in
time of stress, but in the _leading up_ and _afterwards_, then was he
weak as twine that is boiled, and slow as water standing in a pond.

32 But many of the things that he _did_ do were good, and his name
was not without honour in the land.  Yet when _the time_ came, he did
go.

33 ¶ John, that was also called Honest, was another of them that
_believed_ not in war.  Therefore he did hide himself away in the
shadows of oblivion; but he hindered not the rulers in their
endeavour.

34 ¶ Now Haldane was the Keeper of the King's Conscience in the land
of En, and he was a man that _was_ learned in the ways of the men of
Hu, for his spirit abode amongst them; and the King of Hu, he _did_
love him as a brother.

35 And the time came when all the people cried out with a loud voice,
saying, Haldane must go!  But because the winds did blow in an _high
quarter_, he heard them not.

36 And there was a certain man and his name was Northcliffe.  And it
came to pass that when _he_ cried out, behold, his voice _did_ rise
_even as_ the winds, and it was above the shouts of all the other
people.

37 And when Northcliffe had raised his voice for a long time so that
his throat was raw, being like unto the flesh of a kid _that is_
newly killed,

38 And when all the people had joined with him, shouting in a mighty
voice that did _shake_ the seats of the rulers with the violence of
its clamour,

39 Then did Haldane hear, and he hearkened unto them.

40 And the people rejoiced them exceedingly, thinking it not good for
one that had been _in with_ the men of Hu to hold an high position in
the land.

41 ¶ Now Tennant was adroit of the tongue.  And when certain _of the_
counsellors questioned him closely, seeking that they might entrap
him, he would answer them with a multitude of words; nevertheless
would he not say _anything_.  And when _the time_ came, he did go.

42 ¶ And concerning the _other_ rulers of the land of En _at the
beginning_ of the Great War, is it not written in the Book of Stubbs?
Both their names and the streets wherein they did have _their_
habitations, thou shalt find them in that Book in _the order_ that is
of the alphabet.




CHAPTER IV.

1 _The caution of the rulers_.  4 _They make them a censor_.  11 _The
people complain_.  14 _They tell the people more_.  15 _And appoint
Balf to speak concerning the navy_.  20 _He doeth so_.  26 _And
becometh a laughing stock_.


Now when the rulers of the land made them a war, they became very
wary, fearing lest their enemies should discover _those things_ that
they had in store for them.

2 And they said, the one unto the other, It were prudent to say
nothing unto the common people _concerning_ what we have done.  In
this manner shall we preserve their peace of _mind_, and it will be a
means also whereby we may throw dust in the eyes of the men of Hu.
But _after_ it is all over, then will we tell the people.

3 And because the thing that they did contemplate was not possible,
_therefore_ were they constrained to tell unto the people _certain
things_ concerning the war and _how_ went the day.

4 ¶ Nevertheless, they _were_ affrighted lest the people should learn
_too much_, and so they made them a censor.  And this _was_ one that
would say, This is so, and this only; the rest, _it is_ not so.

5 And they that sold news unto the people were vastly provoked, for
it liked them not to be told _the things_ that they should say; also
was it an hindrance _unto them_ to be circumscribed by the truth.

6 And when they came into the presence of the censor and bowed
themselves low before him (for he was a great man), he _would_ have
none of them.

7 And he would say unto them, These three lines, _they are_ official:
but the other things that _have_ happened, they did happen not at all.

8 And those amongst the newsdealers that did _know something_ would
foam at the mouth in the violence of their rage.  And _they_ would
spit upon the floor and would utter deep curses.

9 And because _he was_ an orderly man, therefore did the censor make
him a scheme for the better administration of all _those things_ that
were within his authority.  And the scheme that he did make, _it was_
this.

10 After a thing had become known in the land of Hu for _the space_
of thirty days, then would he deliberate in his mind concerning it.
And if it seemed good _unto him_, after seven days had passed he
would impart it unto the people.

11 ¶ And there was a great outcry throughout all the land, for this
was but one of _many things_.  Verily, the patience of Job was not
tried as the patience of the men of En in the days when they waged
war.

12 And the people said unto the rulers, Why do ye these things, ye
_men_ of little understanding?  Are we children that ye treat us
thus, and have ye no faith in the strength of _our_ conviction?

13 _All those things_ that are safe for us to know, them shall ye
tell unto us.  And if the tidings be good, assuredly we will rejoice.
And if the tidings be bad, they shall but serve to fortify our
purpose.  The tempest disturbeth the waters, the tempest _revealeth_
the rock.

14 ¶ And the rulers heard what the people did say, and they hearkened
unto them.  And _they said_ unto him that was the censor, The people
are complaining _because_ they know not how goes the day.  Therefore
shalt thou tell them more about it: but take care that _it be_ not
much more.  And he did that which the rulers had told him to do.

15 ¶ And the rulers of the land did also call _unto them_ a certain
man, and his name _was_ Balf.  And he was over all the vessels of
war, a mighty force, supreme upon the seas.

16 And they said _unto him_, Because thou _art_ thou, therefore shalt
thou say unto the people whatsoever seemeth good unto thee.

17 For thou hast a wise head _and_ a still tongue, and whatsoever
thou sayest, _it will_ not be too much.

18 Now it came to pass that the vessels of the men of En did fight
with the vessels of the men of Hu in a great battle, and it raged for
a _long_ time.

19 And before it was come to an end, behold, the vessels of the men
of Hu did steal away quickly and did _hide them_ in a mist, for the
day had not gone well with them, and _they were_ sore afflicted.

20 ¶ And when word was brought unto Balf _concerning_ the battle, and
_concerning_ the numbers that had perished on both sides, he did call
the people unto him, and he spake unto them, saying,

21 Woe is this day that hath brought desolation unto En.  Know ye, O
my brothers, _how many_ be slain of them that sailed against the men
of Hu?  Assuredly, the number thereof, it is very great.  And of the
vessels of war, _there be_ many destroyed.  Verily is this a day
_that is_ full of woe.

22 And when the people heard that _which_ he did say unto them, they
were perturbed beyond measure, fearing they knew not what.

23 And after a certain time had passed by, he called the people unto
him again, and he spake unto them, saying, _Wherefore_ are ye
perturbed and _why_ cast down?

24 Listen unto me, ye men of gloom, and rejoice at my words.  For in
that battle whereof I have told you, _many_ perished that sailed from
En; but amongst the men of Hu there was carnage _that was_ great
beyond compare.  And that day did see our adversary vanquished in the
fight.

25 And they that heard him were amazed and said, the one unto the
other, What _strange_ fruits, _these_, of his philosophy!

26 ¶ But the news-mongers gloried in his foolishness, _because_ he
was the mouthpiece of the rulers.

27 Nevertheless, he that _was_ the censor relaxed not his vigilance,
so that nothing was known in the land of En save only _those things_
that were necessary for to quiet the people.




CHAPTER V.

1 _Concerning the changes that were wrought by the war_.  2 _The
debtors are given grace_.  4 _Strong drink becometh hard to get_.  10
_It groweth difficult to make a journey_.  16 _The bazaars are closed
at an early hour_.  20 _Much money is earned by the workers_.  22
_The manner of spending it_.


And these are _certain_ of the things that did come to pass in the
land of En during the days of the Great War.

2 ¶ Now immediately that there _was_ war, grace was given unto them
that were in debt; and that which they did owe, for a certain time
_they did_ not pay it.

3 Therefore was the war a mixed blessing unto such as _these_, and in
those places _that are_ beyond the Gate of Notting Hill, the days of
grace were welcomed with the sound of timbrels and there was much
rejoicing.

4 ¶ And those that drank not strong drink set them to work.  And they
concealed _their purpose_ beneath the shadow of the war, and they
prevailed upon the rulers _to be_ an help unto them.

5 And so _it was_ that the doors of the taverns were closed against
the people save only for five hours during the day; neither was it
lawful _for them_ to buy any strong drink from the publicans _except_
at the time appointed.

6 In this wise did the water bibbers advantage their object, for they
had rightly conceived that the war _was_ an hefty lever wherewith to
work their will.

7 And those that drank of the juice of the grape did become quick _at
the_ swallow, for the time that they did have, it _was_ short.

8 And the preachers and all those that _did_ meddle with the
independence of the people were filled with pious joy, and they
rejoiced in their tabernacles of stone and of tin, and in their
habitations _also_, saying, Thus are the wicked punished _and_ the
thirsty sent empty away.

9 And because the publicans were the people to _go for_, and they did
know it, therefore did they not complain; and the _cocoa_ gulpers
triumphed on that day.

10 ¶ Now there were many sojourning in the land of En that came of an
hostile country.  And because _they were_ a danger unto the state,
therefore did the rulers make _new_ laws concerning _them_.

11 And to _this_ end, whosoever did travel unto certain places was
commanded to write him his name in a book that _was_ at the inn where
he did rest.

12 Now when a man and a woman did journey unto the sea and did
sojourn there _for a_ week-end, then would they say unto all and
sundry, Behold, a priest has licensed us to do this thing, for _we
are_ wed.

13 And sometimes it _was_ so: but there were some that did lie about
it, hoping _perchance_ to save them lodgment money, or fearing to
offend the righteous.

14 Therefore was the new law a cause of vexation _unto them_, for to
write in a book their true names, it was not wise; and to write them
names that were false, it was a dangerous thing _and_ costly withal.

15 And though many complained in secret, nevertheless, there was no
_change_ made in the law, for the rulers of the land did rightly own
no knowledge _touching_ such affairs; and they that _did_ transgress
did pay the penalty.

16 ¶ And _it was_ ordained that all the bazaars throughout the land
should close them their doors at eight hours after midday.

17 Yea, even _unto them_ that sold tobacco and unto the vendors of
sweet stuffs was the mandate sent.  And _because_ these were used to
ply their trades by night as well as by day, therefore did the order
seem the more amazing unto them.

18 And the damsels liked it not _because of_ their stomachs.  And
when a man did go for to buy him cigarettes and _it was_ too late, he
would utter maledictions upon the doorstep; and the next time he
_would_ remember.

19 And in the time of his extremity the married man did borrow from
his wife; and _it did_ cost him dear because she _did have_ her
price.  Verily, whatsoever she desired, that did she get _out of_
him, for the moment _was_ favourable unto her purpose.

20 ¶ And many were put to labour on munitions, and they _did_ work
them long hours at a goodly recompense.

21 And when the week _was come_ unto its end, then did they receive
their hire; and because _it was_ a lot of money, they knew not what
_to do_ with it.

22 ¶ And some bought them musical instruments; wherefore was there
great complaining _amongst_ those that lived round about, for the
noise that they did make was as the harmony of the damned.

23 And amongst the women, there were _some_ that bought them feathers
and ribands of a gaudy hue; and they adorned _themselves_ most
wonderfully.

24 And whensoever they ventured forth into the public places, there
_was_ a stir amongst the populace.  Yea, verily, from the north
_unto_ the south, and from the east _unto_ the west, wheresoever they
appeared, the people were amazed at the strangeness of their garb.

25 But there were many that _being_ full of wisdom and aflame with
love of En, did lend a part of that _which_ they earned unto the
rulers of the land _for_ to buy them munitions of war.

26 And, howsoever much it was, it did breed them profits during every
year that it was _away_, so that they prospered and became men of
substance.

27 Nevertheless, there was fear _in them_ that when the war was come
to an end the rulers would take from each so _much_, saying unto him,
A good and faithful servant has thou been and prudent, and thou
_wast_ an help unto us _when_ we had need of thee.  And now, listen:

28 Inasmuch as thy brothers have wasted their substance on idle
_things_ of no account, therefore are they become paupers, and they
_are_ hungerstarved.

29 But thou _hast_ been saving in the past and thine hire has bred
thee profits.  Thy foresight has delivered thee from want _during_
all the days of thy life.

30 Therefore shalt thou pay so much _unto each_ of thy poor brethren,
for in this wise they shall have subsistence that _will_ keep them
safe from want.

31 And the wasters winked them each the _left_ eye, for they knew
full well that when _the time_ came that they were impoverished, then
would the thrifty ones be taxed for to feed them.

32 For the frugal man _shall_ sweat; but the waster, he shall lap it
up.  And so _it was_ in the land of En.




CHAPTER VI.

1 _The chief amongst the tax gatherers speaketh unto the people_.  5
_They hearken unto him_.  9 _Wherefore the price of paper
increaseth_.  12 _The people are divided amongst themselves
concerning the notes of paper_.  17 _The nature thereof_.  19 _The
people lend their money unto the rulers_.  26 _And the land of En
becometh mighty_.


And _because_ there was war, therefore did he that was chief amongst
the tax gatherers send word unto the people regarding _what_ they
should do.  And he said unto them, Hearken unto me, all ye men of
wealth, and _obey_ my behests.

2 Ye know that the hosts of En _are_ gone out against a mighty enemy,
against a strong foe and one _that_ is wary.  And his armaments are
terrible beyond anything seen by men before.  Therefore it behoves us
to gird up our loins for the fray, because it will be a fight _unto_
the death.

3 And all the gold that ye have, that bring ye _unto me_, and I will
give you notes _that are_ of paper in place of it.  And whatsoever ye
may buy with gold, _that_ may ye also buy with the notes of paper.

4 And our strength will be great amongst the nations, for gold
_maketh_ a good ambassador.  And we will buy us deadly engines of war
and munitions in a great quantity, for a long purse _sufficeth_ in
all things.

5 ¶ And so the people _did_ bring gold unto the rulers, some in
pieces of ten, some in pieces of an hundred, and some in pieces of a
thousand.  Verily, _whatever_ gold the people did have, that did they
bring with them.

6 And as the people delivered their gold unto _the one_ appointed, he
would say unto them, How many pieces of gold hast thou brought,
brother?  And he would answer them, _saying_, Such and such a number
have I brought.

7 And he would exchange him the gold for notes of paper, _even_ one
note of paper for each piece of gold that _he did_ bring with him.

8 And the weight of gold that was exchanged in those days, it was
very heavy, _so that_ it did take seven hundred seventy and seven
thousands of elephants for to move it.

9 ¶ And the number of the notes of paper was _beyond_ all counting.
Wherefore there was a dearth of paper in the land and the price _of
it_ became an high one.

10 And they that were dealers in books demanded five shekels of
silver for their wares; and _before_, they did ask only four shekels
of silver and six pieces of copper.

11 Nevertheless, there yet remained _some_ in the land that bought
them books _for_ to read: and _the rest_ of the people, recking not
the waste of paper, did take up their pens, and they did write.  And
Artemas, the scribe, he _was_ one of these.

12 ¶ And because it was not the custom in the land of En to use notes
of paper, save amongst them _that were_ rich, therefore were the
people divided among themselves _concerning it_, whether it were for
an advantage.

13 And those that were careless in their manner of living, they liked
it not.  But the others, they _were_ content, for the notes of paper
were without weight, and the space that they did occupy, it was small.

14 And when a man, _thinking_ it a bill that was not paid, did throw
away a note of paper that was worth twenty shekels of silver, then
would he curse aloud, using _new_ words, and he would affright the
passers-by with the violence of his lamentations.

15 And because the notes of paper were thin and _did_ stick
themselves _together_, therefore did a debtor, _being_ unaware,
sometimes give the worth of two pieces of gold unto him to whom he
owed but one.

16 And this man _also_ would sorrow cursefully and he _would_ tear
his hair.  And Willi, _that was_ the cause of it, he would consign
him unto the nethermost part of Hell.

17 ¶ And the notes of paper _were_ not alike, being writ in two
colours; and the one colour, it was black, _and_ the other colour,
_it was_ red.

18 And one of _those_ that were writ in black was as much as two that
were writ in red; wherefore, and because they were passing rare, they
found great favour in the eyes of the people.

19 ¶ Now it came to pass that the rulers did _have_ a need of money
for to buy them implements of war.  And they sent word unto the
people _concerning it_.

20 And immediately there arrived at the receipt of custom a great
multitude of men, each man bearing upon his back a weight of money,
_according_ to his means.  And they jostled, the one against the
other, in their haste _to be_ first.

21 And they said unto the rulers of the land, All that which we have
brought with us, that do we lend unto you.  Go ye out, _therefore_,
and buy ye the things _that are_ necessary.  Neither shall ye stint
yourselves in the matter, but rest assured that whatsoever more ye
shall require, it _shall be_ forthcoming.

22 And the notes of paper that they did bring unto the rulers of the
land were _in number_ as the blades of grass in a meadow that
extendeth out of sight.  Yea, even _more_ than the words of the
rulers was the number thereof, _notwithstanding_ that the jaws of
these were for ever agitated.

23 So the rulers of the land did set out for to buy them munitions of
war in a great quantity; even all that _which_ they did require did
they set out for to buy.

24 And all the merchants of the world came in _unto them_ and
displayed their wares before them; and they _were_ eager for to make
the bargain and to traffick with the rulers.

25 For the power of money was great in that time, and _the things_
that it could not do, they _were_ not.

26 ¶ And _because_ the people brought unto the rulers money that
_was_ of a value beyond calculation, therefore was the might of En
felt _throughout_ all the world.




CHAPTER VII.

1 _The country is bereft of its young men_.  2 _The rulers send unto
the women_.  3 _Who make them munitions of war_.  4 _And sell
merchandise in the bazaars_.  8 _And watch over the people_.  11
_They receive much money_.  14 _Concerning a certain man that imbibed
too freely_.  23 _The women work on the land_.  34 _They rebel_.


Now it came to pass that all the young men went forth for to fight,
and there remained only those that _were_ old or infirm and _some_
that _had_ sneaked them through.

2 ¶ And _because_ there was much work to be done, therefore did the
rulers of the land send word unto the women, saying, Come ye unto the
workshops of the cities and there do all _those things_ that the
young men were wont to do.  And they came as with one accord.

3 ¶ And they did make them munitions of war of many kinds, and did
become skilled artificers, _both_ in metal and in wood; and they
rested not from their labours, save only _on the_ days appointed.

4 ¶ And there were others that _did_ sell merchandise in the bazaars.
And so it fell out that when a man went forth for to buy him
under-vestments, the damsel that was in the bazaar _would say_ unto
him, What is thy need, O son of man?

5 And he was ashamed to tell her _all that_ which was in his heart,
and he knew not what to say; wherefore was he halting in his speech
and his countenance did take on the colour _of_ blood.

6 But the maiden that did tend unto his wants, she was _in no wise_
disquieted, and she did beseech him to impart unto her the name of
_the thing_.

7 And, afterwards, she did hold up the leg of the garment for
appraisement and did raise her voice in praise of it.  And the young
man was brought into a _proper state_ upon the instant, so that he
did buy whatsoever she did shew unto him.  And his going out from
that place _was_ quicker than his coming in.

8 ¶ And there were women appointed for to see that the people did no
wrong thing.  And certain of these did betake them on the dark nights
unto the quiet places _at a time_ when the mating season was nigh.

9 And they did flash them a light _on those_ that were unready; but
those that did know _about it_, them did they find better
circumstanced.

10 And the people liked it not, for there was no place that was safe
unto them, and the course of true love was _an hard one_ and much
beset with spies.

11 ¶ And because the women were given high places in the land,
therefore was their recompense high _also_, and the money that they
did earn, _it was_ a large sum.

12 And so it came to pass that certain men that were mean of spirit
forsook their labours and _became_ idle.  And when men spake unto
them _concerning it_ and upbraided them, they answered them, saying,
Wherefore should we go _about_ it?  And why should we toil?  Are not
our wives diligent, and do they not provide for us according to their
means?

13 And they that heard them were filled with a great aversion, and
they were glad in their hearts that in all the land of En there
_were_ few men like unto these.

14 ¶ Now there was a _certain_ man and he did imbibe of the juice of
the grape in a manner that was not wise.

15 And every night when he returned unto his habitation he was full
up with strong drink; and because he sought his bedchamber _in vain_,
therefore would he make him a couch upon the mat _that was_ nigh unto
the gate.

16 And it was a sore trial unto his wife, _for_ she knew not what to
do.  And she did cast about in her mind, seeking to devise some means
whereby to make him whole.

17 And because she was a woman wise beyond the most, being also
strong and lusty, _therefore_ did she contrive a plan; and she became
one _of them_ that looked after the people.

18 And the same night when her husband returned unto her, walking in
soulful meditation _because_ he was drunk, then did she go forth for
to greet him; and she came _upon him_ in the way.

19 And she called unto her two women, mighty of stature, that were
lying in ambush near by.  And the muscles of their arms were _of a_
size and their strength was very great.  And they _took_ him.

20 And it came to pass upon the morrow that he was brought _before_
the judge.  And when he had heard all that the women had to say, he
said unto him, Assuredly _thou art_ a guilty man.

21 For thine indiscretion thou shalt be mulcted in forty shekels of
silver; and if thou payest not _upon_ the nail, then shalt thou be
cast into prison, there to remain _during_ fourteen days.

22 And because he was a wise man when the morning _was come_,
therefore he _paid_ up; and he returned unto his home much chastened.
And from that day forth he put all strong drink away from him,
wherefore he _was_ called Tam-ed, which signifieth, One that hath
_been_ through it.

23 ¶ Now when the harvest was ripe, and there were no labourers in
the fields for to gather it in, the husbandmen _that were_ on the
land became cast down and they did make them an outcry.

24 And certain women approached unto them, and said, Wherefore are ye
cast down, ye wealthy _men_ of the fields?

25 Behold, we and our sisters will gather in the standing corn, and
_in the_ winter we will prepare the ground for the crops that are _to
be_.

26 And because it is not _in them_ to be otherwise, therefore the
husbandmen changed not their countenances that were woeful; but they
said unto the women,

27 Forget ye not that _ye are_ what ye are.  Nevertheless, because ye
say it, _therefore_ it shall be so.  First shall ye reap the harvest,
and afterwards shall ye do the _other_ things whereof ye speak.

28 And so the women laboured all day in the fields.  And they did
take them cooling drinks _amongst_ the corn when the sun was high,
and they did eat cream _that was_ rich unto yellowness, and _also_
pasties in abundance.  Nevertheless, when night was come they _did_
sleep; neither did the things that they had eaten lie heavy upon
_their_ stomachs.

29 And so the harvest was gathered in and there was much rejoicing
because _of it_.  But amongst the husbandmen there was only
foreboding, for _such_ do never rejoice.

30 And when the cold of the year was come, the husbandmen spake unto
the women, saying, Now is the time when ye shall go forth to prepare
the ground for the crops that are _to be_.

31 And so the women went forth.  And when they had come unto the
place appointed, behold, there was a great heap before them, and _it
was_ manure.  And the husbandmen drew nigh and they said unto the
women,

32 All this shall ye spread upon the fields, and _more_ also.  And it
shall come to pass, after that _ye have_ digged it in, that the earth
shall be renewed; and the crops that ye shall sow, _these_ shall
flourish exceedingly.  And the husbandmen went their way.

33 Now the heap _that was_ manure, it was an abomination; and the
stink thereof was so great that the women did cover over their
nostrils with cambric and with pieces of fine lace.

34 ¶ And they followed _after_ the husbandmen with one accord, and
spake unto them, saying, We did gather in your corn, even the oats
and the barley did we reap for you: and the hay, we did _make_ it
into stacks.

35 And the husbandmen answered them, _saying_, Verily all these
things whereof ye speak, _them_ did ye do.

36 And the women said unto them, The scent of the harvest was sweet
unto our nostrils; but this heap _that is_ manure, it is a stinking
thing, and we will have none of it.

37 So they turned them about and hied them unto the cities for to
become scribes.  And they _did_ spend the wages of their first week's
hire upon a measure of choice perfume.  Nevertheless, the stink of
the heap _that was_ manure abode with them during many days.




CHAPTER VIII.

1 _The rulers make them new laws_.  2 _And close the bazaars_.  5
_They give more light_.  9 _They tax the profits that were made
because of the war_.  13 _Bribery flourisheth_.  15 _The petrol is
conserved_.  18 _They that seek after pleasure are taxed_.  20 _The
taxes are paid gladly_.  23 _Concerning commissions_.  29 _And
Northcliffe_.


Take heed, all ye that read, and pay attention, for _these_ are the
things that the rulers of the land of En _did_ lay upon the people at
a time when there was war.

2 ¶ Now they did make them a law and did enjoin upon all the dealers
in merchandise that _they should_ cease from trafficking in the
market places in the youth of the night; yea, at eight hours _after_
midday were they constrained to stop from selling their wares and
merchandise.

3 And the reason thereof was uncertain, some saying it was _for a
means_ of saving fuel, whilst others did say it was because those
that served in the bazaars _were_ few and needed them rest.

4 But there were many that did say it _was_ but the spirit of
interference that was rife in the land; and they were filled _with_
suspicion, thinking that the _early_ closers were grinding them
_their_ axe.

5 ¶ And in the summer season the rulers did give unto the people more
light.  And _it was_ the light of day that they bestowed, but upon
_the doings_ of the war they shed no more light.

6 Now the giving of more light was one of the things that the rulers
did wisely, _wherefore_ the people did praise them; and they were
amazed, for it was not the custom amongst the men of En to praise the
rulers _of_ the land.

7 Neither was there _often_ cause therefor, for a wise ruler is
precious _beyond_ price, howbeit many a fool is raised unto an high
place;

8 For the fool speaketh _sometimes_ wisdom, and it _is_ recorded.
But the foolishness of fools do men forget.

9 ¶ And certain men did set them about for to find a means whereby
they might _make_ a good _thing_ out of the war.

10 And when word was brought unto the rulers _concerning_ what they
were doing, they did make them a law.  And they did take unto
themselves a certain share from the profits that _these_ men did
gather in.

11 And those that were at one with the patriots complained not; and
those _that were_ making them _enough_, neither did these complain.

12 _And_ they that _did_ do things for the rulers _out of_ the
generosity of their hearts, even these went not empty away.

13 ¶ And there were certain men amongst the servants of the rulers
that did ask for _sweet_ oil, and they _did_ say unto the traders,
Grease thou the palms of our hands that we _may_ bargain with thee to
thy advantage.

14 And those that _were_ found out were cast into prison, and their
names did stink _most_ vilely _throughout_ the length and breadth of
the land.

15 ¶ And because it was a prudent thing _to do_, the rulers gave unto
them that had chariots only _so much_ of what men called petrol as
was left _over_.  And the hosts of En did receive their portion
before all others.

16 Therefore those that were wealthy amongst the people used not
their chariots _save_ when there was need; and they that were _used_
to joy ride, they did do so no more.

17 For in all matters were the people ready to make them sacrifices
_unto_ the needs of the war, and they did do all _those things_ that
were _required of them_ for to bring nearer the end _of it_.

18 ¶ And a tax _was made_ upon all those that did go unto the
theatre; yea, even upon them that did view the pictures and upon them
that did watch men playing _with_ a ball, _was_ the tax imposed.

19 And because it was _not much_, and was, moreover, a righteous tax,
they did pay it gladly; and the number of them that _did_ go unto
such places, it was not less _than_ before.

20 ¶ And there were other taxes also and they were exceeding heavy,
_so that_ all the money that was paid by the people unto the tax
gatherers _was_ great beyond anything that men had thought possible.

21 Nevertheless _there was_ no murmuring in the land, and the people
did push, the one against the other, _to be_ first at the receipt of
custom, every man _with_ his money in his hand.

22 And he that was the chief amongst all the tax gatherers was
amazed.  And he spake unto _several_ concerning it, saying, Are not
these that do shower their gold _upon_ me the same that before did
curse my name?  When I asked for a mite, _they_ reviled me
shamefully; yet, now I ask for much, behold, they bring it flowing
_over_.  For he understood not that this _was_ the spirit of the
nation.

23 ¶ Now when there was any matter that was _beyond_ the rulers so
that they knew not what to do, they would appoint them a commission
for to inquire _concerning_ it.

24 And a commission was an assembly of wise men _that were_ sometimes
foolish; and they would gather themselves together, and they would
question all and sundry, and they would talk.

25 But lest they should do _some thing_ in their carryings on, the
rulers would give them instruction and would speak unto them, saying,

26 Go ye into a room apart and _gather round_.  And send the young
men into the highways and into the byways that _they may_ bring unto
you all them that know aught concerning _the matter_.  And whatsoever
they may say unto you, that shall ye hear.

27 Afterwards, ye shall make us a report, for _that_ doeth injury
unto no man.  But woe be unto you if ye shall do _anything_ that
exceedeth our commandment; verily shall our wrath burn thee up, and
thy bones shall fall away into dust.

28 By this means did the rulers put away for a long time those things
that _were_ vexatious unto them, having faith in the memory of the
people that _it was_ short.  Therefore was a commission unto the
rulers _as_ a bag of sand unto him that fighteth, for it was a
_shield_.  And the day was not known _whereon_ the rulers appointed
them not a commission.

29 ¶ But there was a _certain_ man and his name was Northcliffe.  And
the people were divided into two camps _concerning_ him, some saying
that he _was_ a raiser of scares, whilst others did say that he _knew
things_.  And all were agreed that he was a thorn in the side of the
rulers.

30 And when a commission did bring its report unto the rulers, then
did _these_ retire unto the privacy of their bedchambers.  And the
report they did take _with them_ for to be a pillow unto their heads.

31 And Northcliffe would raise his voice on high and he would say
many bitter words.  And he would arouse them and would make them _to
do_ things.

32 And though many were against him _because of it_, the good that he
did do was manifest.  And because he left not the rulers to sleep,
therefore did men call him Helsabout, _which meaneth_ The Awakener.




CHAPTER IX.

1 _Darkness in the cities_.  5 _The young things rejoice_.  7 _And
love flourisheth_.  10 _Many errors are committed_.  14 _Concerning
what happened unto a certain young man_.  27 _The reason thereof_.
30 _One pardoneth the little boys_.


Now the rulers sent them word unto all the cities, saying, Let
_there_ be no light; and there was no light.

2 And every man did hide his candle under a bushel, else did he pay
for his rashness in many shekels of silver.  Yea, _there was_ even
darkness upon the highways and in those places _where_ the people
_did_ pass to and fro.  And the darkness did breed confusion.

3 Now they that lived in Lon were in two minds concerning it.  And
some that did sell merchandise in the bazaars, they did make them a
noise, being perturbed _because of_ their pockets.  And there were
others that did utter loud manifestations of joy.  And the old women
that were there, _these_ ventured not forth after the sun was set.

4 And they that were dealers in merchandise did make loud
lamentations and did put on sackcloth and ashes, saying, Wherefore
should we sit in darkness?  And why cry our wares _in the_ shadow?
And because men knew them, therefore they heeded them not.

5 ¶ But amongst the _young things_ of the city there was great
rejoicing, for the mandate, it was welcome unto them.

6 And they said, the one unto the other, Behold, it is dark.  Let us,
_therefore_, advantage ourselves somewhat.

7 ¶ And they did hie them in pairs unto the quiet places; verily,
every male did take with him a female as _his_ companion, and they
did talk of love.

8 And because the Bishop of that city was _against_ love, and because
there were many sojourning there _that did_ pry, therefore did the
swains speak _low_, fearing lest the eavesdroppers should come upon
them.

9 And there were _many_ that did plight their troths, because it was
their opportunity; and many promises were given in vain.

10 ¶ And because it was dark, women of strange countenance _did_ get
them off _with men_, for a cheek that was fair as the petals of the
hyssop was _of_ no avail in the night time.

11 Even so, there was many a woman that did lose _her man_ ere the
passing of the first lamp.  And he that was once bit, on the next
occasion he did carry a torch in his hand for to see what _it was_.

12 And if a man _did_ bump him into his own wife, he would say polite
things, _for_ he did not know her;

13 And because he did say polite things, _therefore_, neither would
she know him.  And strange _things_ did happen because of it.

14 ¶ Now it came to pass that a certain man was returning _unto_ his
habitation at an hour when the night was far gone.

15 And it was the custom in that city to travel in a carriage that
did go in part beneath the ground; and the reason thereof was
_because it was_ quick.

16 And, behold, as he proceeded on his way and was come nigh unto the
place of his abode, suddenly a great darkness overcame him so that he
became as one that is blind.

17 And all the people that were with him in the carriage were
dismayed and they did rise upon _their_ feet, and _did_ mingle, the
one with the other.

18 And he that had authority in _that_ carriage spake unto them and
commanded them that they should sit down.  And they sat them down.

19 And it came to pass that, after the young man had sat him down,
behold, his right hand was taken from him and it _was_ squeezed.

20 And even as he pondered on this strange thing that was happening
unto him, behold, he was bereft of his left hand also, and it _was_
squeezed.

21 And he was taken unawares and knew not what to do, for he was a
young man and righteous, and _he was_ married unto a wife.

22 Therefore, he sat him still and did wait for whatsoever might come
unto him.  And, lo, presently there _was_ a kiss given unto him upon
the left cheek; and, afterwards, was there a kiss upon his right
cheek also.

23 Yea, both upon the right cheek and upon the left cheek did he get
him the kisses, and it _was_ for a long _time_.

24 And the kisses that _did fall_ upon his left cheek were a warming
lot and pleasurable; and the others, they were cold.  Therefore did
he turn him about for to lean towards the side that _was_ hot.

25 And, behold, his cheeks were seized upon the instant between two
hands that were soft; and the one that was upon his left side did
kiss him with _earnestness_ upon the mouth so that he trembled at the
touch.  And because he was _become_ enamoured of the pastime,
therefore did he return the kiss _for_ a long spell.

26 And even while it yet happened, the light was returned unto the
carriage, and he _did_ see.

27 ¶ And, behold, upon his right hand did sit a man that was lately
come back from the wars; and she _that was_ upon his left hand was a
damsel very comely to look upon and blushing red.

28 And because it was a mistake, therefore was he not kissed _again_
either upon the right cheek, or upon the left cheek, or yet upon the
mouth.

29 And when he returned him unto his house, he did get him silently
_unto_ his bedchamber.  Neither told he his wife anything about it,
fearing lest _she would_ not understand.

30 ¶ And concerning another man, it is written that he did tie a
piece of white cloth unto _the gate_ of his house so that he _might_
know its whereabouts when the moon was not high.

31 And the small boys of the neighbourhood _did_ come and they took
away the piece of white cloth that was upon the gate and they did tie
it unto the portal of an house wherein there lived a _certain_ woman,
of pleasing mien and fair to look upon; and her husband was gone to
the wars.

32 And when the young man returned unto his habitation, behold, the
piece of cloth that he did leave, it was not there; and he _was_
deceived so that he entered in unto the wrong house.

33 Nevertheless, the young man _did_ forgive the boys of the
neighbourhood for _the thing_ that they had done unto him.




CHAPTER X.

1 _The beginning of Flag Days_.  7 _The nature thereof_.  10_The
plight of the males_.  14 _Their efforts to escape_.  17 _The
generosity of the people_.  19 _The disadvantage of a new alliance_.


Now it came to pass that those who _were_ in the land of En made them
a custom, and they did sanctify certain days of the year unto charity.

2 And the days that were sanctified they _did_ call Flag Days.

3 Now these are certain _of the_ Flag Days that were set aside unto
charity in the land of En in the days of the Great War.

4 There was Our Day, and Star and Garter Day, and Roll of Honour Day,
and Red Cross Day, and Blue Cross Day.

5 And there was France's Day, and Russia's Day, and Serbia's Day, and
Italy's Day, and Montenegro's Day, and Roumania's Day, and Portugal's
Day.

6 And there were other Flag Days in great number so that I, even I,
Artemas, the scribe, remember not one half.

7 ¶ And on a day that _was_ a Flag Day the young maidens of the
cities would gather themselves together ere the morning was weaned,
and they would _set out_.

8 And they would hie them unto the populous places of the cities and
they would place themselves in ambush behind the corners of the
streets; yea, each one would take unto herself a certain corner as
her own, and she _would_ lie low.

9 And when any man approached nigh unto the place where she was hid,
then would she spring out _on a sudden_ and she _would_ tackle him.

10 ¶ And she would pin a flag unto his garment, even unto the lapel
of _his_ coat would she pin her flag; and _whatsoever_ money he did
have for to buy him bread, _that_ would she take from his pouch for
to pay her, wherefore he needs did fast.

11 And there was no way of escape open unto him, for the young girls
of that time were a slim _lot_ and they _knew_ the manner of working
it.

12 And so it came to pass that, when the night was come, the damsels
that had sold them flags were bowed down beneath a great weight of
gold.  And the men that _had_ paid, these were sent empty away.

13 And they returned unto their habitations, each man being
wonderfully adorned; yea, from the crowns of their heads unto the
_turn-up_ of their nether garments _were they_ gay with coloured
flags.

14 ¶ Now there were certain men that, seeking to throw dust in the
eyes of the sellers of flags, did build them dungeons underneath the
ground, saying, with a sly look, It will be a safe place if,
perchance, a Zeppelin _cometh_ nigh.

15 Nevertheless, on a night when the Zeppelins did hover _above
them_, then were they on the roofs of their habitations with glasses
that did magnify;

16 But on the days that _were_ Flag Days, then did they betake
themselves stealthily away and they did hide in the far corner of the
Zeppelin dungeon that was deepest down.

17 ¶ And because much good flowed from the Flag Days, and because the
number of mites that was gathered in was very great, therefore _did_
the people _stick_ them, each man giving according to his means.

18 Yea, even those that did retire unto their Zeppelin cellars did
give to an _extent_, for the young girls followed them thitherwards,
so that there was no means of escape left unto them; verily, they
were like unto a spider _that is_ caught in the meshes of its own web.

19 ¶ Wherefore it came to pass that when another nation did join with
the people of En, and did fight with them against the men of Hu,
there were some in the land that did foresee _things_, and their
hearts misgave them.

20 And when one spake chidingly unto them, saying, Why do ye not
rejoice, O men of little satisfaction?  Behold, there is yet another
that fighteth with us.  Then would they make answer and would say,
Assuredly is there another ally come to join us.  And there is _also_
another Flag Day that bringeth greater persecution at the corners of
the streets.  And they were full of foreboding _concerning it_.

21 But the Flag Days found favour amongst the women of the land, for
then was man delivered into their hands and _they needed_ not to
spare him.




CHAPTER XI.

1 _The young men go out for to fight_.  2 _Many take unto themselves
wives_.  11 _Some think it not wise_.  19 _Some transgress the law_.
22 _The matrons are rejoiced_.  23 _All the maidens would wed amongst
the officers_.  27 _Concerning the damsels that were left over_.


Now in the land of En the young men did hurry them away unto the war,
and amongst the maidens _there were_ many sad at heart.

2 ¶ And when the time drew nigh unto a young man that he must gird up
his loins and go, then _would_ he speak unto the damsel of his choice.

3 And he would say unto her, Thou knowest that there yet remaineth
unto me only _so many_ days; let us therefore arrange matters quickly
that we _be_ married.

4 And because the time was short and _it was_ her chance, she would
answer and would say unto him, Thou art my lord, and whatsoever thou
commandest, it shall be done.  Let us therefore hasten _about it_
lest, peradventure, we meet with an hindrance upon the way.

5 For the women of that time _were_ a crafty lot and they did beguile
their men with soft words; and the wiles of Bathsheba, that _did_
wash herself, were as nothing _in comparison_ to these, for they were
full of artfulness.

6 And when she had told her mother and them _that were_ about the
place, she would take the young man unto the priest for to make
_them_ a day; and _after_ it was in order, then would they go unto
the ringmaker and she would try on whatsoever came unto her hand.
Yea, _many_ rings would she place upon her finger; but _the ring_
that she did choose, that did she not try on, fearing lest it prove
unlucky _in the_ afterwards.

7 Now it happened in certain cases that the damsel needed not to
furnish her with garments for the wedding, inasmuch as she was
prepared, being ready _against the occasion_.

8 But when it was not so, then would the damsel set _about_ it, and
she would make _things_ hum.  And she and those that were related
unto her and her handmaidens also, they would haste them unto the
bazaars.  And whatsoever was necessary unto the marriage, that thing
would they buy; and _of the things_ that were not necessary unto the
marriage, they would also buy them some of these.

9 And when the last minute was come, then would they send the _old_
man for to buy that _which_ was forgotten, saying unto him, Get thee
quickly, _thou_ fool.  And he _would_ get him quickly.

10 And when the hour was come for the young man to take the damsel
unto him, behold, she _was_ there.  And throughout all the land of En
there was no case known of a damsel that _did come_ too late.

11 ¶ And because there _was_ a great number of them that did wed in
this wise, therefore was there much talk _concerning_ it, both in the
public places and in the habitations of the people.

12 And some _did_ say it was a foolish thing to do.  And they did
speak darkly concerning the future, what it did hide, for it went
_for a saying_ amongst them that a marriage _that_ is hasty bringeth
early regret.

13 And others said, Let the young men wed.  Verily, many go forth
unto the wars but the number _of them_ that return, it is not so
great.  Therefore is it necessary for them that are _of an age_ to
make _them_ families, else in what manner shall the nation endure.

14 And the young things heeded not these arguments, for they _were_
young and did love.  And whosoever loveth _enough_, he hath his
justification.

15 But woe unto that man who taketh unto himself a wife for the sake
_of it_; a million tears will not suffice for to drown _her_ in.

16 But he that marrieth his beloved in haste, seeking happiness, that
man assuredly _hath_ a dog's chance; and he that taketh time _about_
the business, is not his risk also great?

17 And there _were_ some that did marry for love and there _were_
some that did marry for a pension; but there _were_ some that did
marry because it was a discreet thing to do.

18 And the number of them that did marry was _beyond_ anything that
men could remember, so that the priests did gather them an harvest of
_exceeding_ richness and they did bless the unions with many pious
_words_.

19 ¶ Now certain men did take unto themselves more wives than one,
which _was_ a wicked thing to do, for in the land of En it was not
lawful _for a man_ to marry two wives.

20 And this was passing strange, for the seduction of a maiden was a
thing that was _winked at_.  Yea, the father of a child begotten
guiltily, he was absolved by the payment of five pieces of silver
every week.  But the man whose wife did bear him a son, his
_punishment_ was greater than this.

21 And in those days was man judged _according to_ a rule, and an
hurt transgressing not the rule, that was forgiven unto him.  And to
marry two wives, _that was_ against the rule; but to keep two score
of concubines, _that was_ a lawful thing to do.

22 ¶ And because there was war, therefore did many mothers _pull off_
forlorn hopes at the last minute, which rejoiced them greatly.  For
there _was_ much competition amongst the daughters of En, and _the
number_ of young men did not suffice for all.

23 ¶ And every maiden did seek for _to get_ her an officer, for
_these were_ great men whom the common soldiers did salute in the
public places, so that to walk with such an one _was_ indeed
pleasurable.

24 And there was much cackling in all the hen-roosts of the land of
En, and _amongst those_ families that did get them an officer there
were loud manifestations of joy.

25 And the pride of these was _beyond_ all telling, and they _would_
hold up their heads on high and they _would_ say unto them that did
live next door, Bow ye down before us and make obeisance.  Know ye
not that Miriam, our first-born, _hath_ taken a captain to husband?

26 And because they _did_ know _it_ and because _their_ daughter had
succeeded only as high as a corporal of the lance, they would bow
themselves down and would speak words of flattery, for she that was
_wife_ unto a captain was a power in the confines of _the_ cities.

27 But there _were_ many maidens that no man took unto him for wife,
and the days of these were bitter living; neither did their sisters
that had _clicked_ refrain from telling them _about it_.

28 Wherefore some of the damsels _that were left over_ did journey
into the wilderness for to meditate concerning the matter, for the
airs of a woman that is married are _as_ a goad unto her that
languisheth alone.

29 And so it came to pass that certain _of them_ did get them war
work from the makers of munitions, and certain _of them_ did get them
war babies from no man knew whither.  Yea, every one did act
according to her lights and _did_ do all those things that the
occasion did demand.




CHAPTER XII.

1 _Concerning those that went not forth for to fight_.  14 _The
rulers commune together on the matter_.  17 _And call out all the
young men_.  18 _But certain are absolved_.  25 _Wherefore many are
combed out_.  29 _And the people are satisfied_.  31 _Each man payeth
for his own strong drink_.


And when the fighters had gone forth unto the war, there yet remained
_certain men_ that were strong and sound of limb.  And every man that
went not forth, _he had_ his reason.

2 And some said, To kill men in battle is a wicked _thing_.  Would ye
therefore have us _to go_ against our consciences?

3 And when the people questioned these, they replied unto them,
saying, The wise man giveth obedience unto his conscience lest it
torment him; neither _is there_ any escape from it.  And we are men
of wisdom.

4 And if one of the men of Hu shall ravish our eldest daughter,
_then_ shall we offer unto him she _that_ is next unto her that he
may ravish her also; for so it is written.

5 And they that questioned them forbore to ask them more, deeming a
conscience _such as this_ was assuredly come from the devil.

6 And there were some that, being affrighted, hid themselves away.
And the number _of these_ was small and, when _the time_ came, they
were _combed_ out.

7 And there were others that were grown selfish, because they _did_
gain much recompense by their labours, and these were loth to leave
their habitations.  And they did say,

8 Wherefore should we go forth for to fight?  In our houses _there
are_ many fires and the women do put them hot bricks into our beds
_so that_ our feet suffer not when the night groweth cold.

9 And if we go out for to fight, verily, the rain from heaven will
fall upon us and it will _make_ us wet.  And a skin _that_ is wet
affecteth the nose.

10 And the food that we shall eat, it will lie _heavy_ upon our
stomachs; neither will the women sustain us with hot bricks.

11 And because of all these things, they went not forth unto the war
_until_ the time came when they were _combed_ out.

12 And there were many men throughout the land that were willing to
go at _the time_ appointed, each _man_ in his turn.

13 And these did say, "Wherefore should we depart from our
habitations and wherefore leave our wives amongst strange people?
Send first the young men _that are_ hanging back; and, afterwards,
when our time _cometh_, we shall be ready.  And ye shall find us in
the forefront of the battle.

14 ¶ And because that which they had said was just, therefore the
rulers of the land could not gainsay them.  And they communed
together in the council chamber _concerning it_.

15 And some, knowing not _the spirit_ of the people, did say, Let us
now do nothing rash lest, if we call up all the young men, they raise
an outcry throughout the land.

16 But there were others that said, _It is_ sufficient that we have
need of men for to send against the enemy.  Let us therefore _see
about it_.

17 ¶ And they overruled those that _were_ against them, and did make
them a law whereby all the young men were called out for to fight.

18 ¶ But they absolved them that were in the workshops making the
munitions of war, and acquitted them also _that were_ plagued with a
conscience.

19 And because the men of Ire said, We will not _have_ it, therefore
the rulers dared not to say _them_ nay, for the men of Ire were
rulers in the land of En.

20 And they appointed them tribunals, a mixed lot of men, so that
_those_ that were called out might show them a _reason_ against it.

21 And because the net that was spread in the sight of the young men
was wide _in the_ mesh, therefore was the haul thereof fraught with
disappointment.  And the young men did work themselves free in ways
that _were_ various.

22 And some hied them unto the workshops to become makers of
munitions of war, saying, the one unto the other, _By this means_,
assuredly, shall we save our skins.  And for a long time _it was_ so.

23 And others did cry their woes before the tribunals.  And _the
tales_ that they did tell were pitiful indeed, and they did move the
tribunals unto compassion _so that_ they absolved them.

24 And the rulers, that did _ought_ to set an example, made lusty
youths for to be their scribes, and they did put them for to do
women's work.  And the number _of them_ that were absolved in this
wise became a crying shame that was _heard_ throughout all the land.

25 ¶ And when the rulers were questioned hotly _concerning_ these men
and _concerning_ those that had hidden themselves behind the rampart
that _was_ munitions, they bestirred themselves somewhat and did
_comb_ them out.

26 And the number that they did _comb_ out was very great.  And
because they had not done _this thing_ before, but had waited until
the people raised them a clamour, therefore were the rulers blamed
exceedingly.

27 Nevertheless, those that rebelled against it because they did have
consciences, _these_ were not sent out for to fight.

28 But some of them were set to work upon _matters of health_, which
was a loathsome duty and abhorred by them who, _being_ without a
conscience, went out against the enemy.

29 ¶ And when all the men that _were_ of full vigour had been
_taken_, there was an end to the murmuring of the people.

30 And all were of one mind that this thing should have been done
before, for they saw that the taking was just, no man suffering
beyond his neighbour, and every man fighting for his own.

31 ¶ Now it was made a law that whosoever should enter into a tavern
for to buy him strong drink, that man must pay for _his own_.

32 And there were some, being them that drank beyond their means,
that had a grievance _because_ of it, for to pay for _their own_,
they had forgotten the way.

33 Wherefore they did suffer exceedingly and _were_ for ever dry; and
_their_ look, it was a thirsty one.

34 And when _the damsels_ heard about it, they set them out for to
find _a means_ to circumvent it, for the thing was not agreeable unto
them.

35 And when a maiden approached unto a tavern, being with a man that
had a leaning _towards_ her, then would she stop outside, and she
would say unto him, Give thou unto me five pieces of silver that I
may pay for _mine own_.  And whatsoever remaineth over, that will I
give thee back after _we are_ come out.

36 And they would enter into a tavern.  And she would call the
serving man unto her and she would speak unto him in a soft voice,
saying, Bring unto me a small portion of _that_ wine which cometh
from Oporto that I may nourish my bones.

37 And the serving man would bring it unto her, and he would set it
down before her.  And the damsel _would_ pay for it out of the five
pieces of silver that she had received from her man.  And whatsoever
was left over, _that_ would she place in her purse.

38 And _afterwards_, she would smile upon the man that was with her,
and she would say unto him, Thy beard becometh thee well.  Thou art
strong and thy wisdom is great and thine eyes absorb me _utterly_.
Verily doth thine handmaiden feel small in the sight of her lord.

39 All this would she say unto him, and more also; but concerning
_that which_ was remaining over from the five pieces of silver she
would say no word.

40 And this is ever the way of women that by their artfulness they do
_wangle it_, and whatsoever cometh up _contrary_, that do they work
for to be an advantage unto them.




CHAPTER XIII.

1 _Concerning David_.  7 _His unpopularity amongst certain of the
people_.  9 _The rulers disagree_.  11 _David speaketh out_.  14 _He
findeth favour with his enemies_.  17 _The things that he did do_.
24 _He reacheth unto high office_.  27 _The Pharisees fall away from
him_.  29 _His greatness_.


Now there was a certain man and his name was David, and his place
_was_ amongst the rulers of the land of En.

2 Though small of stature, yet was he of a fiery spirit, and the hair
upon his face was _as_ the bristles of a badger _that is_ roused.

3 And his tongue was for ever loose and did wag itself continually,
being like unto the tail of a small dog that scenteth its food _from_
afar.

4 Now David was one of them that _did_ come from the land of Cam, but
the language of his kindred did he speak only upon occasion;

5 And at other _times_ he did speak as the men of En, save only when
he delivered him a warning unto them that would _butt_ in; and in
such case his words were those of the land of Amer.

6 Now at the time when Willi did lead out his hosts for to fight,
David _was_ the chief tax gatherer in the land of En.

7 ¶ And his name was an abomination throughout the land.  Men cursed
him in the market places, in the sight of the publicans he was a
thing unclean, and _his_ name stank vilely in the nostrils of the
priests.

8 Verily, to love En and David both, was not thought possible by
many.  Only amongst the Pharisees was it not so, and _these men_ of
little mind did glorify him with a great praise.

9 ¶ Now it came to pass when the rulers of the land of En took
counsel, the one with the other, concerning whether they should
_make_ them a war, there were some that did say, Let us make a war,
for an honourable pledge _demandeth_ fulfilment; nought can absolve a
nation from _its_ plighted word, and we are _what_ we are.

10 And there were others _that were_ the Pharisees, and they did say,
Why hasten ye towards the shedding of men's blood?  Better a peace
that obeyeth divine precept than a war _that_ upholdeth the word of a
nation.

11 ¶ And when David heard the things that the Pharisees did say,
behold, he arose from his seat in the council chamber and spake unto
all _them_ that were there.

12 And he lashed the Pharisees with his tongue, sparing them not.
And because he was _of_ them, therefore were the words that he did
say unto them passing apt, so that they _did_ wriggle in their seats
as worms _that are_ upon an hot plate.

13 And them that would preserve the nation's honour at a cost _of_
blood, these did he sustain with the strength of his doings and the
whole might of _his_ oratory.

14 ¶ And _when_ the publicans and the priests and those that had
cursed him in the market places were told what he had _done_, they
were amazed that such a thing could come to pass.

15 And they said unto each other, What manner of man is this that
hath for so long _been_ against us, yet now speaketh our very minds?

16 And they raised him up and made him _to be_ ruler over them, and
he did find more favour amongst those people than he had found
amongst the Pharisees in the time that _was_ gone.

17 ¶ And it came to pass that whatsoever _there was_ to be done, that
thing did David do; verily, his capacities were as manifold as the
lies of a woman accused.

18 And they made him chief over the munitioners, and he did make him
engines of war and instruments of siege, and other implements of
battle _also_, the quantity whereof exceeded calculation.

19 And nobody throughout all the land excelled him in energy and in
ingenuity of the mind.  And he did even make the workers to work; and
this _was_ a thing that was never _before_ known in the land of En.

20 And when the men of Ire, _because_ they were never content, waxed
angry, the one with the other, and there was like to be rebellion
amongst them, and there _was_ need of a mediator for to judge between
them,

21 Then the choice of the people fell upon David, and they did send
him unto the land of Ire for to speak the soft word _that_ charmeth
away wrath.

22 And David went.  And after he had finished speaking unto the men
of Ire, he returned him unto his seat amongst the rulers.

23 And because _he was_ the first man that did go for to pacify the
men of Ire, yet stirred not up further strife, therefore was his name
honoured above any, and poets did sing his praises on the feast days
_of the_ Eisteddfod.

24 If And the rulers did choose him to succeed unto a great soldier,
and they did place him over the hosts of En, making of him a mighty
captain.  And _because_ the people would have none other, therefore
was he chosen.

25 And the work that was _already_ begun, that did he continue.  And
he did make the hosts of En great beyond all conception, and the
strength of En was as the foundations of the earth.

26 And his popularity with the people did grow day by day, wherefore
men said, in jest, Behold, here _cometh_ David, George that is the
Sixth.  And they that had hated him before did worship him as a god.

27 ¶ But the Pharisees knew not what to do, for he was become as a
revelation unto them.  Therefore did they say very little
_concerning_ him; and when it happened that they had occasion to
utter his name, then would they do so _with_ a sniff _upon_ the word.

28 For _such is_ the way of the Pharisees.  And these do place peace
above the honour of a nation and an unctuous word before the doing of
a thing that is right.  And in them there is no stomach for the fray.

29 ¶ But David cared not at all for such as these, and there was no
man greater in all the land.  And when _the time_ came, he did sit
upon the highest seat amongst the rulers of the land, because he was
the chosen of the people, and they would have none other.




CHAPTER XIV.

1 _The implements of war_.  8 _The engines that did fly_.  14
_Concerning the Mad Major_.  25 _The men of En employ tonics_.  34
_Wherefore the men of Hu cry out_.


Now _these be_ the implements of war, and all these things did men
use at that time when the nations of the earth banded themselves
together for the fight.

2 Now there were guns of great magnitude that _did_ hit hard so that
there was nothing that could withstand them, and, against them, the
fortifications of the cities _were_ as snow when the sun cometh out.

3 And the guns did scatter death on _all_ sides, above and about, so
that there was no living thing left nigh unto the place where they
_did_ strike; and the compass of a gun, it was _beyond_ the sight of
human eye.

4 And there were mines that the engineers did make them _underneath_
the ground; and all that which was above the ground, _that_ did they
scatter unto the heavens so that when it returned again to earth,
behold, it _was_ not.

5 Also was there gas, and it was made of a vile poison; and when any
man did deeply breathe of it, that man would most assuredly die; and
the manner of his death, it _was_ terrible.

6 And they that first made use of the gas that was poison _were_ the
men of Hu, for it was _in them_ to do so because their minds did
travel unto such things.

7 And there was liquid that _was_ fire, and it was sent against an
host for to burn up the flesh _of them_ that came in the way.  And
this was also _from_ the men of Hu and was bred of their refinement.
And neither of these things did the nations of Eur use in any war
that they did wage _before_.

8 ¶ And there were engines that did fly through the air, fearsome
weapons of war that _did_ deal out death and destruction from an
ambush of clouds.

9 And they were of two kinds.  And the Zeps _were_ fat-bellied, being
of the men of Hu.

10 These did carry on their goings out a great weight of _matter_
that _was_ death.  And they did drop it _at a venture_ so that it
fell amongst peaceful dwellers in the land; and the women and
children that did perish by this means, it _was_ a great number.

11 And there were also engines that did fly which men called planes:
and _these_ were of both sides.  And they were speedy things _and_
nimble.

12 And those that did ride in them were brave men and skilful.  And
the men of Hu prospered not with the planes save only _in the_
flight, at which they were exceeding quick.

13 And so there came a time when the men of Hu forbore to go up into
the air for to fight _because_ the hazard of such an enterprise, it
was very great.

14 ¶ Now the bravery of the warriors of En that did ride in the
planes was in the mouths of all the peoples _of_ the earth.  And
there was one whom men _did call_ the Mad Major because of his daring.

15 And it was said concerning him that he and death played them a
long game wherein the dice were loaded on _the side_ of death.

16 And he would venture forth and would fly from the camp of the men
of En until he came unto a place whence he could see the hosts of Hu
_spread out_ beneath him.

17 Then would he choose him a target from amongst the strong _places_
that were below, and he would swoop him down _on a sudden_ so that he
was but a few cubits on high.

18 And the men of Hu would use _all_ manner of weapons against him,
and they would send projectiles that did scatter _about_ for to bring
him down amongst them.

19 Yea, from the places that _were_ nigh unto him and from the places
that _were_ afar off would they send of their munition, seeking only
that they might slay him.  And the heavens were filled with a
multitude of balls so that men said, Verily, in the place _where_ he
is, in that place only is it possible for man to live.

20 And when he that was called the Mad Major was _low enough_, then
would he drop him a bomb.  And it came to pass that all that which
was _underneath_, it was destroyed, and the men that _were_ there did
assuredly perish.

21 Then would he ascend into the air unto a certain height, for that
which he had come for to do, _it was_ done.

22 And he would loop him _a loop_; yea, even over the hosts of Hu
would he loop him _a loop_, for he was of a merry spirit and it was
_in him_ to laugh in this manner.

23 And when he had looped him _a loop_ he would return unto the men
of En, and he _would_ say unto them, The bombs that thou gavest unto
me _went_ off.  Give me, therefore, some more that I may dispose _of
them_ in likewise.

24 And he was not alone in the things that he did do, for there
_were_ many like unto him.  And concerning the deeds of some thou
shalt find it writ in the books; but concerning many, thou shalt find
no record of _their_ deeds in the chronicles of that time.

25 ¶ And the men of En did make them chariots of strange and
wonderful design, and they _did_ call them tanks.  And there was no
man throughout all the land that did say, I made not this chariot;
but every man did draw his neighbour _unto the side_, and did speak
unto him privily, saying, Shush!  Let it not be known.  I tell thee
that I, even I, did take _an hand_ in this thing.

26 And the shape of the tanks was for a long time known only to the
few.  And some said they were _like unto_ a lizard that is blown out
mightily, that walketh as a man plagued with _the_ corns.

27 And others said they were _like unto_ an hippopotamus that doth
wobble itself amazingly so that no man knoweth whither it intendeth;
yet, _of a certainty_, doth it get there.

28 And others said they were _like unto_ nothing on earth, being for
the most part belly of a fashion _that is_ given unto no living thing.

29 And that _which_ was a shield and a covering unto the tanks was
tough past all belief; yea, even the hide of the rhinoceros did not
compare unto this.  And all the missiles that the men of Hu did send
_against_ it were as peas upon a roof that is whole, and it availed
them nothing.

30 And in its gait it was like unto a man that hath taken strong
drink, having first devoured much rice.  For in such case does the
belly grow big and the footsteps do _become_ unsteady.  Wherefore it
was a thing _for_ laughter amongst the men of En; but in the hosts of
Hu it was a thing _for_ fear.

31 And men told strange tales of the _things_ that it did do.  And it
was said that upon an occasion it did sally forth and, in its
adventuring, it did meet with an habitation.

32 And it did go up unto the habitation and it _did_ look upon it.
And it did go _against_ the habitation _with a purpose_ so that the
walls did fall about it and there was ruination on all sides.

33 And after it had shaken itself free from all that _which_ had
fallen upon it, it did betake itself with modesty unto another place
as a man that is overcome with shyness and seeketh to _pass it over_.
Verily, it recked _nothing_ of the thing that it had done.

34 ¶ Wherefore, and because it did smite them hip and thigh, sparing
not any man that did come up against it, the men of Hu _were_ afraid,
and they did cry out with loud lamentations, saying, Why do ye so
despitefully _use_ us?  Know ye not that it is not _in the war_ to do
these things?

35 And because men _knew_ them, they heeded not their groans, so that
it availed them nothing; and the tank remained a thing of terror
throughout all their hosts.

36 And in this thing the men of En _were_ first amongst all the
fighters of Eur, for _it was_ new.  And the people rejoiced, being
satisfied that it was given unto them as a sign that the rulers were
_becoming_ awake.




CHAPTER XV.

1 _Concerning the land of Amer_.  4 _And the ruler thereof_.  11
_Certain men of Amer are slain_.  12 _Wudro, the son of Wyl, writeth
an epistle_.  26 _He writeth again_.  27 _He writeth many times_.  28
_Certain men do question him_.  38 _He revealeth himself_.


Now the land of Amer was at the other side of the sea _that is_
Atlantic, and it was many days' sail in a ship from the island of En.

2 And the bounds of that land were set far apart, and the people that
did live there were more numerous than the waves of all the seas.

3 And it was a fertile land of extreme fruitfulness, and the earth
_underneath_ it yielded precious metals in abundance.  And the people
were for ever extolling its greatness _amongst_ the nations of the
earth.

4 ¶ Now the ruler of the land of Amer was a certain man and his name
was Wudro, the son of Wyl; and it happened _in this wise_.

5 Whilst Wudro, the son of Wyl, was tending his flock of young men in
the pasture _that is_ knowledge, and after he had taught them how
they should go and what things they should know,

6 Behold, the men of Amer came unto him, saying, We have chosen thee
for to rule over us; and we have _brought_ thee an high hat for to
wear as the badge of thine office; and the size of the hat, _it is_
six seven-eighths.

7 And because he knew not what he was letting himself _in for_, he
gave way to their importuning, and did put on the high hat, the
_size_ whereof was six seven-eighths.

8 And it came to pass that when the men of En fought against the men
of Hu, they did send messengers unto the land of Amer for to buy them
munitions for the war.  And they took _with them_ gold in great
quantity wherewith to satisfy the merchants that did sell unto them.
Therefore did the land of Amer prosper exceedingly.

9 Now when the men of Hu found out that _there was_ peril in the
enterprise, they forbore to send out vessels of war for to fight; in
place thereof, they did send them out for to murder those that _were_
peaceful and did _sail_ the seas without any weapon _wherewith_ to
defend themselves.

10 And coming upon a large ship unawares, they did send it unto the
bottom of the sea so that all _they_ that did travel upon it were
cast into the waters for to drown.  Yea, even the women and children
that were aboard the vessel, all these perished miserably, and the
men of Hu did watch their struggles with death unheeding.

11 ¶ Now amongst those that the men of Hu did slay there were
_certain_ men of the land of Amer.

12 ¶ And when word was brought unto Wudro, the son of Wyl,
_concerning_ it, and how the men of Hu had slain his servants, he
waxed very wroth.  And he betook himself unto a quiet place, _fearing
lest_ in the height of his indignation he should do violence unto
_any_ man.

13 And although he was enraged _beyond_ endurance, nevertheless he
was a patient man withal.

14 Therefore he did sit him down _and_ he did write an epistle unto
Willi, being him that ruled over _the men_ of Hu.

15 And he said _unto him_, Knowest thou not that thy servants have
slain certain of the men of Amer _because_ they did sail upon the sea?

16 And Willi answered him, saying, Verily, all that thou sayest _is_
true.  Let us therefore put on sackcloth and ashes, and rend our
garments, for it is _a day_ of mourning unto thee, and I, _also_, am
full of sorrow because of it.

17 And when Wudro, the son of Wyl, heard all that Willi had said, and
how he made answer unto him in soft _words_, he knew not what to do,
for _he was_ a peaceable man _and_ the land of Amer was prospering
greatly.

18 So he sat him down and did write unto Willi again, saying unto
him, Thy tears _are as_ an healing ointment.  But _the thing_ that
thou hast done, that shalt thou do not again, _for_ there is a
penalty unto it.  Take heed, therefore, and obey, for I am a terrible
man, and fierce.

19 And Willi answered him and did say, Thou _hast_ said so and so,
for I have _seen_ it with mine own eyes.  Let us now speak
_concerning_ other matters.

20 And he called unto him a messenger and did command him to deliver
the epistle unto the ruler of the land of Amer.

21 And after he was gone, he set to work secretly and did _make_ him
preparation, for it was his intendment to do again _that thing_
regarding which Wudro, the son of Wyl, had forewarned him.

22 And when the opportunity came, he did sink more ships, and he did
leave those that were _on them_ to perish.  And because they were all
vessels of peace, and without armour, therefore was he strong
_against them_.

23 And a messenger came unto Wudro, the son of Wyl, in hot haste, and
he told him of the things that Willi had done and _how that_ he had
slain yet more of the men of Amer.

24 And _because_ he was much agitated at the tidings that were
brought unto him, _therefore_ did Wudro, the son of Wyl, swear an
oath, making divers new _words_ for the occasion.

25 And he said unto the courier, The matter _concerning which_ thou
hast spoken unto me is fraught with evil consequences, for I will
write unto Willi another epistle, and I will use mighty words, and I
_will_ affright him.  Also, there shall be _an afterwards_.

26 ¶ So he sat him down and did write unto Willi another epistle; and
the words _of it_ were so terrifying that the hand of his scribe
_did_ tremble even in the putting of it down.

27 ¶ And for a long time it came to pass that whenever Willi did slay
any of the men of Amer, _then_ did Wudro, the son of Wyl, send an
epistle unto him, abounding in fearsome words and writ upon one
_side_ of the paper only.

28 ¶ And certain men, _being_ of a curious mind, questioned him,
saying, It is true that the epistles that thou writest are things
_for_ terror, and that _the man_ who reads them, his blood becometh
frozen so that it circulateth not.

29 And it is true, also, that the things which thou threatenest _are_
dire.  But the _things_ that thou doest, what are they?  Is it not an
eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth?  Yet thou hast sold our lives
_for_ gold.  Thy threats are idle, and thy words serve but to tickle,
not to scratch.

30 And Wudro, the son of Wyl, _having_ knowledge, did reason with
them.  And he spake unto them in these words, _saying_: What mean ye?
Are not the epistles to your liking?  Are not my words strong _and_
well chosen, and is not my meaning plain to all?

31 And they answered him, saying, Verily, these things are so.  Have
we not said it?  Nevertheless, the man that is wounded by a word, he
_sheweth_ no scar.  _How then_ is the marksman to know?

32 And hast thou not perceived that Willi laughs at thee before thy
face; and, _behind_ thy back, he doth extend his fingers towards
thee, pointing them _from_ the apex of his nostrils.

33 At thy threats doth he scoff aloud, and thy servants doth he use
_in a manner_ that is abominable.

34 If these things find not favour in thine eyes, send forth thine
hosts that he may know that _there is_ might behind thy write.

35 And Wudro, the son of Wyl, did loose his tongue _upon them_ and he
upbraided them, soundly, saying, Am I a fool and a blind man _that_
rule over you?

36 Wherefore, then, should ye upbraid me, and who are ye to choose
_the time_?  Verily, I say _unto you_ that a lack of understanding,
it shineth from your eyes.  And your words, they are wanting _of_ any
wisdom.

37 But I am trusted of my people; neither shall I betray that trust
_because_ of your importuning.  And when he had spoken unto them in
this wise, he sent them away.  And he satisfied _them_ not on that
day.




CHAPTER XVI.

1 _Wudro delivereth a warning_.  5 _Willi seeketh advice_.  9 _And
taketh it_.  10 _Wudro acteth according to his word_.  11 _Whereat
Willi is amazed_.  13 _He speaketh boastfully_.  17 _Wudro setteth
about the matter_.  22 _He frighteneth Willi_.  23 _Who perceiveth
the blessings of peace_.


Now the longest rope, _it hath_ an end.  Wherefore it came to pass
_in time_ that Wudro, the son of Wyl, did send unto Willi, that was
the King of the Hu, and he said unto him,

2 Such things and such things hast thou done, _all these_ being
against thy plighted word; and thine iniquity, it hath tormented me
for a long _time_ past.  Now, therefore, hearken unto me, _and_ pay
attention:

3 Because I am a man of peace, therefore have I borne with thee long
_enough_; and I am become sick unto death _with_ thy carryings _on_.
And the blood of my murdered people, it crieth out for retribution.

4 Take heed, _therefore_, and mend the evil of thy ways, for, _on
the_ next occasion, assuredly shalt thou rue the day.

5 And when Willi had heard _these_ things that Wudro, the son of Wyl,
did say unto him, he sent in haste unto his chief captains, and he
did commune _with them_.

6 And he questioned them closely concerning the words of Wudro.  And
he said unto them, Think ye that this man, he meaneth _anything_?

7 And they made answer unto him, saying, Be of good cheer and heed
him not, for he is a man that acteth only _according to_ his
advantage.  And to make war, it would advantage him nothing.  For the
land of Amer, it prospereth exceedingly; and the miller turneth not
away _that stream_ which worketh his wheel.

8 Also, he liveth afar off and his servants, _they are_ unready.
Verily, the threats of such an one, they be full of emptiness; and
whatsoever he sayeth, that hath he _also_ said before.
_Nevertheless_, we will smite him _because_ of it when the time is
ripe.

9 And after Willi had heard all the things that the captains of his
host did say unto him, his heart was rejoiced _within_ him, and he
said unto them, Assuredly are ye men after mine own understanding.
Let us, therefore, see _about_ it.  And they did see _about_ it.

10 And when word was brought unto Wudro concerning these things and
how Willi _did_ set his warning at naught, making mock of his
threats, then was he very wroth, and he cried out in the violence of
his anger, saying, Am I, then, Job, _that be_ born again, to be
tormented thus?

11 And he _straightway_ called the people unto him, and he spake unto
them.  And after he had told them _everything_, he said unto them, Is
it, therefore, a _matter for_ war?  And they answered him with a
mighty voice, saying, It is a _matter for_ war.

12 And when Willi heard what was come to pass, _he was_ amazed, and
his knees, they did tremble beneath him.  And he commanded his
servants that they should bring unto him the brazen mask, being part
of the royal attire; and _he did_ put it on.

13 And after that it was _on_, he did raise his voice on high, and he
spake, saying,

14 What of the land _of_ Amer?  And what _of_ it?  Verily, a pin that
lieth in _the way_, it is of more account than a spike that lifteth
its head _at a_ distance.

15 And the iron heel of Hu, it levelleth all things; neither shall
_any man_ dare to withstand it.

16 And when he had finished speaking, he sent out messengers _unto_
the four corners of the earth, instructing them that they should tell
_these things_ unto all people, for he was a boastful fellow and a
braggart, _for ever_ holding forth in large manner for to be heard of
all the world.

17 Now Wudro, the son of Wyl, _after that_ he had made him war, he
cried not out from the housetops what things he would do, but he gat
him about it for _to do_ them.

18 And he opened wide the strings of his purse so that the shekels,
they gushed _forth_ as the waters of a brook after rain.

19 And he sent much munition of war unto them that were _with him_,
and he commanded his physicians that they should go out for to
succour the wounded.

20 And he _did send_ his vessels of war also, which were useful
things and ready for the fray.  And of men that did fly _in_ the air,
he sent also _of these_, an eager band _and_ valiant.

21 Neither was he backward in the matter of food, making due
provision in _all_ things.  And he did set him about it for to build
him an army, a mighty host _such as_ never before was seen.  And he
rested him not, neither in the day nor in the night did he rest him,
doing _always_ those things that were requisite _for the_ undertaking.

22 And when word was brought unto Willi that Wudro, he had taken the
coat from off his back, and that he was labouring without any
respite, he grew sore afraid, and _he did_ shake all over with the
violence of the tremble of his knees.

23 And when he was recovered by a potion of strong drink, he _did_
call the Ministers of State unto his chamber, and he spake unto them,
saying, Is there no one _now_ amongst the men of peace _that will_
raise his voice against this bloody war?

24 And, lo, straightway, _there was_ a voice, and it spake concerning
peace.  And it was blown along by the wind, even unto the land of
Amer _was it_ blown.

25 And when it was come unto the ears of Wudro, that was the son of
Wyl, he made answer unto it, and he did say, Verily, it hath a goodly
sound.  _Nevertheless_, this peace, it shall not come to pass, for
the king of Hu, _he hath_ a lying tongue, and his plighted word, hath
he not broken it before?

26 And because he is _what_ he is, therefore shall the compact of
peace be made only with that man which he is not.

27 And the words of Wudro, they were blown along by the wind, even
back from the land of Amer _were they_ blown on the wings of the wind.




CHAPTER XVII.

Take heed, my son, and hearken unto the words of Artemas, for there
_are_ many that will give thee counsel, yet wisdom _cometh_ only from
the few.

2 Put not thy trust in princes, for their bond is of paper that
teareth _easily_.  And their plighted word melteth like butter,
before the heat of their necessity.

3 Beware of the king whose pledge runneth _away_ like water, for the
skins of such shall paper the walls of hell.

4 A man devoured of ambition, he lieth easily; nevertheless, _there
cometh_ a time when even fools believe him not.

5 Beware of the woman that followeth thee about, for she is _after_
thy regimental buttons.

6 And if she is safe, then is she a fool; but if she is _otherwise_,
then is she the devil.

7 A woman hunteth thee.  She lieth in wait to surprise thee, and will
_out upon thee_ when the time cometh.

8 Flee unto the mountains; pitch thou thy tent _afar_ in the
wilderness; take thou sail across the waters until thou comest unto a
strange coast.  Nevertheless, _because_ she has marked thee down,
_therefore_ will she have thee.

9 When thou goest forth for to fight, take care that thou smitest
thine enemy in the back, for _it is_ the mark of a good fighter so to
do.

10 Also, he that shooteth his enemy _through_ the head sheddeth light
upon his understanding.

11 When the foe doth stand two in a line, shoot thou thy bolt, for
then will thine execution be twofold.  Verily I say unto thee,
_Await_ thine opportunity, for a shell in time is as good as a mine.

12 Remember, my son, that the sum of two and two _maketh_ four; yet
in the reports of thine enemy thou shalt find it otherwise.

13 And because _the pen_ is mightier than the sword, therefore
believe it not, else shalt thou surely be deceived.

14 Verily I say unto thee, Blessed is the man that _hath_
imagination, for his country _shall_ win many battles.

15 Take ye heed _of the_ lone voice, for in a multitude of
counsellors thou _shalt_ find confusion.

16 And an arsenal that is full of munitions is better than an hundred
rulers full _of_ words.

17 Hearken not unto the boasting of thine enemy and regard him not,
for no man knoweth what _the day_ may bring forth.

18 And in the time of its adversity the soul of a country revealeth
_itself_.

19 Get thee about it and do things, for the voice of the sluggard
dieth in his throat, but the worker is heard from afar off.

20 Make thou thy task according to thy strength, for no man that
weareth costly teeth doth gnaw at the bones of an elephant.

21 Make _thy life_ wisely, O my son, lest thy neighbours speak ill
concerning thee.  And if thou shouldst stray _from_ the narrow path,
remember the other, that it is of sand.

22 Wherefore, _tread_ lightly.  For he that leaveth his footprint
_behind_, his foolishness condemns him.  But the _prudent_ sinner is
exalted unto heaven, _and_ his name, it exhaleth a very sweet perfume.

23 For whosoever sups with the devil _in a place_ where men pass by,
shall he not, _therefore_, turn out the light?

24 Woe unto the peacemongers that entice thee _with_ words, for these
do seek thine undoing.

25 Thy way leadeth over stony ground, and to go back, it is _the
manner_ of a coward.

26 For whosoever setteth his hand to the plow, he shall not turn
back; and he that finisheth a furrow, _he hath_ not plowed the field.

27 What man gathereth him the blossom of the apple tree?  Rather doth
he wait until the fruit cometh, big and full of juice; then doth he
eat of it.

28 Avoid thou them that seek to divide the people, one against the
other, for _they are_ traitors in the land.

29 Turn not away from instruction, O my son, but open thine ears full
wide, for wisdom maketh a fair mistress _and_ she is youthful for all
time.

30 And he that followeth after her, his life shall be well ordered
and his affairs shall fall out _just so_.

31 Thou shalt rule _thy_ comings in and _thy_ goings out according to
circumstance, so that nothing ariseth amiss; for a thirst _that is_
born at a proper time, it maketh the publican smile; but a thirst
that cometh late is an affliction unto him that _hath_ it.

32 Take heed, my son, and hearken unto the words of Artemas, for
there _are_ many that will give thee counsel, yet wisdom _cometh_
only from the few.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF ARTEMAS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
